Example of Online Clustering (#23289)
apache/beam: website/www/site/content/en/documentation/ml/online-clustering.md

---
title: "Online Clustering"
---
<!--
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

# OnlineClustering Example

The OnlineClustering example demonstrates how to setup a realtime clustering pipeline that can read text from PubSub, convert the text into an embedding using a language model, and cluster them using BIRCH.

> ### Dataset for Clustering
> For the example, we use a dataset called [emotion](https://huggingface.co/datasets/emotion). It comprises of 20000 English Twitter messages with 6 basic emotions: anger, fear, joy, love, sadness, and surprise. The dataset has three splits: train (for training), validation and test (for performance evaluation). It is a supervised dataset as it contains the text and the category(class) of the dataset. This dataset can easily be accessed using [HuggingFace Datasets](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/index).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Dataset for Clustering
For the example, we use a dataset called [emotion](https://huggingface.co/datasets/emotion). It comprises of 20,000 English Twitter messages with 6 basic emotions: anger, fear, joy, love, sadness, and surprise. The dataset has three splits: train, validation and test. It is a supervised dataset as it contains the text and the category(class) of the dataset. This dataset can easily be accessed using [HuggingFace Datasets](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/index).
```

## Ingestion to PubSub
We first ingest the data into [PubSub](https://cloud.google.com/pubsub/docs/overview) so that while clustering we can read the tweets from PubSub. PubSub is a messaging service for exchanging event data among applications and services. It is used for streaming analytics and data integration pipelines to ingest and distribute data.

The full example code for ingesting data to PubSub can be found [here](sdks/python/apache_beam/examples/inference/online_clustering/write_data_to_pubsub_pipeline/)

The file structure for ingestion pipeline is:

    write_data_to_pubsub_pipeline/
    ├── pipeline/
    │   ├── __init__.py
    │   ├── options.py
    │   └── utils.py
    ├── __init__.py
    ├── config.py
    ├── main.py
    └── setup.py

> `pipeline/utils.py` contains the code for loading the emotion dataset and two `beam.DoFn` that are used for data transformation
> `pipeline/options.py` contains the pipeline options to configure the Dataflow pipeline
> `config.py` defines some variables like GCP PROJECT_ID, NUM_WORKERS that are used multiple times
> `setup.py` defines the packages/requirements for the pipeline to run
> `main.py` contains the pipeline code and some additional function used for running the pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`pipeline/utils.py` contains the code for loading the emotion dataset and two `beam.DoFn` that are used for data transformation.

`pipeline/options.py` contains the pipeline options to configure the Dataflow pipeline.

`config.py` defines some variables like GCP PROJECT_ID, NUM_WORKERS that are used multiple times.

`setup.py` defines the packages/requirements for the pipeline to run.

`main.py` contains the pipeline code and some additional function used for running the pipeline.
```

I like the spacing in the Readme, but in practice this renders as a single sentence if you don't double space - http://apache-beam-website-pull-requests.storage.googleapis.com/23289/documentation/ml/online-clustering/index.html#ingestion-to-pubsub

### How to Run the Pipeline ?
First, make sure you have installed the required packages.

1. Locally on your machine: `python main.py`
2. On GCP for Dataflow: `python main.py --mode cloud`

The `write_data_to_pubsub_pipeline` contains four different transforms:
1. Load emotion dataset using HuggingFace Datasets (We take samples from 3 classes instead of 6 for simplicity)
2. Associate each text with a unique identifier (UID)
3. Convert the text into a format PubSub is expecting
4. Write the formatted message to PubSub

## Clustering on Streaming Data

After having the data ingested to PubSub, we can now look into the second pipeline, where we read the streaming message from PubSub, convert the text to a embedding using a language model and cluster them using BIRCH.

The full example code for all the steps mentioned above can be found [here](sdks/python/apache_beam/examples/inference/online_clustering/clustering_pipeline/).

The file structure for clustering_pipeline is:

    clustering_pipeline/
    ├── pipeline/
    │   ├── __init__.py
    │   ├── options.py
    │   └── transformations.py
    ├── __init__.py
    ├── config.py
    ├── main.py
    └── setup.py

> `pipeline/utils.py` contains the code for loading the emotion dataset and two `beam.DoFn` that are used for data transformation
> `pipeline/options.py` contains the pipeline options to configure the Dataflow pipeline
> `config.py` defines some variables like GCP PROJECT_ID, NUM_WORKERS that are used multiple times
> `setup.py` defines the packages/requirements for the pipeline to run
> `main.py` contains the pipeline code and some additional function used for running the pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`pipeline/utils.py` contains the code for loading the emotion dataset and two `beam.DoFn` that are used for data transformation.

`pipeline/options.py` contains the pipeline options to configure the Dataflow pipeline.

`config.py` defines some variables like GCP PROJECT_ID, NUM_WORKERS that are used multiple times.

`setup.py` defines the packages/requirements for the pipeline to run.

`main.py` contains the pipeline code and some additional function used for running the pipeline.
```

Tokenization can be seen as a preprocessing task as it transforms text in a way that it can be fed into the model for getting predictions.

{{< highlight >}}
    normalized_embedding = (
        docs
        | "Tokenize Text" >> beam.Map(tokenize_sentence)
{{< /highlight >}}

Here, `tokenize_sentence` is a function that takes a dictionary with a text and an id, tokenizes the text, and returns a tuple (text, id) and the tokenized output.

Tokenized output is then passed to the language model for getting the embeddings. For getting embeddings from language model, we use `RunInference()` from beam.

{{< highlight >}}
    | "Get Embedding" >> RunInference(KeyedModelHandler(model_handler))

{{< /highlight >}}

After getting the embedding for each twitter text, the embeddings are normalized as it helps to make better clusters.

{{< highlight >}}
    | "Normalize Embedding" >> beam.ParDo(NormalizeEmbedding())

{{< /highlight >}}

### StatefulOnlineClustering

> As the data is coming in a streaming fashion, so to cluster them we need an iterative clustering algorithm like BIRCH. As, the algorithm is iterative, we need a mechanism to store the previous state so that when a twitter text arrives, it can be updated accordingly.  ** Stateful Processing ** enables a `DoFn` with the ability to have a persistent state which can be read and written during the processing of each element. One can read about Stateful Processing in the official documentation from Beam: [Link](https://beam.apache.org/blog/stateful-processing/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the data is coming in a streaming fashion, so to cluster them we need an iterative clustering algorithm like BIRCH. As, the algorithm is iterative, we need a mechanism to store the previous state so that when a twitter text arrives, it can be updated accordingly.  *Stateful Processing* enables a `DoFn` to have persistent state which can be read and written during the processing of each element. One can read about Stateful Processing in the official documentation from Beam: [Link](https://beam.apache.org/blog/stateful-processing/).
```

    )
{{< /highlight >}}

As BIRCH doesn't support parallelization, so we need to make sure that all the StatefulProcessing is taking place only by one worker. In order to do that, we use the `Beam.Map` to associate each text to the same key `1`.

`StatefulOnlineClustering` is a `DoFn` that an embedding of a text and updates the clustering model. For storing the state it uses `ReadModifyWriteStateSpec` state object that acts as a container for storage.

{{< highlight >}}

class StatefulOnlineClustering(beam.DoFn):

    BIRCH_MODEL_SPEC = ReadModifyWriteStateSpec("clustering_model", PickleCoder())
    DATA_ITEMS_SPEC = ReadModifyWriteStateSpec("data_items", PickleCoder())
    EMBEDDINGS_SPEC = ReadModifyWriteStateSpec("embeddings", PickleCoder())
    UPDATE_COUNTER_SPEC = ReadModifyWriteStateSpec("update_counter", PickleCoder())

{{< /highlight >}}

We declare four different `ReadModifyWriteStateSpec objects`:

* `BIRCH_MODEL_SPEC`: holds the state of clustering model
* `DATA_ITEMS_SPEC`: holds the twitter texts seen so far
* `EMBEDDINGS_SPEC`: holds the normalized embeddings
* `UPDATE_COUNTER_SPEC`: holds the number of texts processed

> These `ReadModifyWriteStateSpec objects` are passed as an additional argument to the process fun, where whenever a news item comes in, we retrieve the existing state of the different objects, update it and then write it back.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These `ReadModifyWriteStateSpec objects` are passed as an additional argument to the `process` function. When a news item comes in, we retrieve the existing state of the different objects, update them and then write them back as persistent shared state.
```

{{< highlight file="sdks/python/apache_beam/examples/inference/online_clustering/clustering_pipeline/pipeline/transformations.py" >}}
{{< code_sample "sdks/python/apache_beam/examples/inference/online_clustering/clustering_pipeline/pipeline/transformations.py" stateful_clustering >}}
{{< /highlight >}}

> `GetUpdates` is a `DoFn` that prints the cluster assigned to each twitter message, every time a new message comes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`GetUpdates` is a `DoFn` that prints the cluster assigned to each twitter message every time a new message arrives.
```

### StatefulOnlineClustering

> As the data is coming in a streaming fashion, so to cluster them we need an iterative clustering algorithm like BIRCH. As, the algorithm is iterative, we need a mechanism to store the previous state so that when a twitter text arrives, it can be updated accordingly.  * Stateful Processing * enables a `DoFn` to have persistent state which can be read and written during the processing of each element. One can read about Stateful Processing in the official documentation from Beam: [Link](https://beam.apache.org/blog/stateful-processing/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the data is coming in a streaming fashion, so to cluster them we need an iterative clustering algorithm like BIRCH. As, the algorithm is iterative, we need a mechanism to store the previous state so that when a twitter text arrives, it can be updated accordingly.  **Stateful Processing** enables a `DoFn` to have persistent state which can be read and written during the processing of each element. One can read about Stateful Processing in the official documentation from Beam: [Link](https://beam.apache.org/blog/stateful-processing/).
```

This was my fault, I made the wrong suggestion last time - originally it was `** Stateful Processing **`, which literally writes the asterisks - if you remove the spaces, but keep the double asterisks it should actually bold it correctly.
